---
chapter: Conclusion
parent: wearebiohackers
flow: 7
---

> “The degradation of labor, education, and the environment is rooted not in technology per se but in the antidemocratic values that govern technological development”
> - Andrew Feenberg

In this thesis I try to understand DIYbio as a social movement from social movement theory by generating insight into the mechanisms through which the movement mobilizes action for social change. For this, I focused on the collective identity of the movement which I recognized as the biohacker; an adaptation of the hacker ethic and FLOSS practices into biology which overall fit into the new socio-technical paradigm of ICTs and the cultural/economic paradigm of CBPP. The collective identity serves as an analytical tool to understand how members of a movement recognize themselves and others as part of the movement and reorient themselves and their actions based on shared meanings of the world. To investigate how members construct the collective identity I researched into the practices and discourses of the movement where they express their motivations, values, and critiques of the social world and how the movement fits into it. I drew my attention into the characteristics, values, and motivations of biohackers, how these collide with the mainstream culture and thus direct collective action for change, and finally how these are reproduced in the online and offline networks where they mobilize action.


What I found is that the word biohacker is a contentious term between the differing connotations of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ hacking and thus biohackers take a proactive approach in defining themselves as constructive not destructive, and assert their identity as strongly oriented towards good biosafety practices and distinct from bioterrorist activities. Defining the boundaries of biohacking between actors and fields of interest proved to be problematic as they disagree on for example whether someone like Craig Venter is a biohacker. However, the biohacker as the collective identity of the DIYbio movement is clearly defined as members recognize themselves and others as part of the movement as they share the same values, beliefs, visions, and critiques that incite collective action for social change. To understand the dynamics between these imaginaries I proposed a problem-solution framework based on three main values from the numerous values and motivations of the biohackers—which proved to be a subgenre of the hacker ethos—which reflect concrete actions that the DIYbio movement mobilizes in the informal networks (movement areas) to achieve social change. The first one is openness which conflicts with the exclusive practice of science to professional scientists in professional labs, in turn biohackers want to open access, or in other words: democratize biology as knowledge, as a science, and as a technology. The second one is freedom which conflicts with doing science for extrinsic motivations, and so the DIYbio movement is committed to freedom of inquiry to enable biohackers to find meaning and satisfaction through DIYbio on their own terms whether that be activism, science, art, entrepreneurship, and so on. The third one is collaboration which challenges the current model of science as a competitive ordeal that treats knowledge and information as a commodity—an expensive commodity of protected monopolistic prices—by sharing everything as an open and unrestricted commons where anyone can freely contribute and collaborate to any kind of DIYbio project


This proposed framework can serve as a basis to understanding the strategies of the DIYbio movement to achieve social change (through openness, freedom and collaboration) as well as to illustrate the opportunities that it creates such as informal education or social innovation. The DIYbio could be considered a political movement as it addresses issues of access and participation to the productive activities of STI, and of the ownership and distribution of the means of production, both material and immaterial wealth such as knowledge and information. Biohackers however are for the most part politically agnostic as they consider the logic of their actions to be cultural rather than political. Nevertheless the goals of the DIYbio movement should be considered as both, as the DIYbio movement develops two key infrastructures (Bauwens, 2005) necessary for sustaining a P2P science: the technological infrastructure by providing access to tools through FLOSS and biohackerspaces and a cultural infrastructure under the (bio)hacker identity with new forms of social relationships and values.


A new model of P2P science is already making its way in institutional science with initiatives such as open science, citizen science, and open innovation, where they establish close cooperation and funding mechanisms with DIYbio. Whether their support comes from legitimately recognizing DIYbio as an low-cost and inclusive solution to education and innovation, or as an exploitation of cheap cognitive capital remains unclear and is yet to be seen. What is certain is that DIYbio will have to develop strategies to take advantage of new opportunities created, as they navigate between the old model and the new model (CBPP), while preserving the ethos of the movement. Such case would be how the movement will manage government and corporate funding whose interests might encroach on their freedom of inquiry by dictating projects or suppress their commitment to openness and sharing by demanding IP protection for commercial exploitation. Whether biohackers defend their ideals, compromise or comply with these intrusions will determine whether the movement is co-opted, or is able to work in a more symbiotic relationship with mainstream science, or both converge into P2P science which could replace the current production model and become the default. Further studies into the different business models and forms of governance of biohackerspaces might give more detailed knowledge on how the biohackers maintain cultural autonomy as the movement grows and struggles between an integral model or a tension model with the mainstream.
