---
chapter: Discussion
parent: wearebiohackers
flow: 6
---

> “Science is an integral part of culture. It's not this foreign thing, done by an arcane priesthood. It's one of the glories of the human intellectual tradition”
> ─ Stephen Jay Gould

In order to provide the foundation to understanding the DIYbio movement my research questions focus on investigating into the mechanisms characteristic of social movements which includes a shared collective identity that abides by similar values and meanings of the world, a conflictual relationship with the dominant culture and clear goals to enact social change, and informal networks where members communicate, organize, and carry out collective action. I directed my attention to the construction of the collective identity of the movement which influences how individuals and groups make sense of their actions, in how they define opportunities and restraints within a system; and activates the relationship of “being together”, it gives sense to the “we” and the goals they pursue together (Melucci, 1993). Therefore my research questions focus on (0) defining the collective identity as the expression of values and beliefs of the movement which (1) dictate collective action to challenge the barriers for social change (the problem-solution), and (2) on the solidarity that develops in the free spaces of the movement. To make the case more concrete I focused on the biohacker as the basis of the collective identity that provides the DIYbio movement the collection of cultural understandings that give meaning to the movement. So the analysis begins by analyzing:

(0) How is the collective identity of the DIYbio movement defined?

Firstly, the term biohacker is not necessarily adopted by all members of the DIYbio movement. Its meaning is attached to different concepts that widely affect what people understand what biohacking refers to and thus the concept of biohackers is fractioned which can affect the cohesiveness of the DIYbio philosophy as a derivation of the hacker ethos. The broader issue in defining biohackers is between the perception of hacking as ‘good’ or ‘bad’. Among the general population the word hacker can refer to nefarious cybercriminals[^30] that hack passwords and bank accounts which applied to the realm of biology brings understandable concerns over widespread access to user-friendly biotech (Schmidt, 2008). To avoid this misconception some biohackers may use more ‘neutral’ labels such as DIYbio, citizen science, amateur science, or biotinkering—the same choice has been seen in the creation and use of the word maker and makerspaces. Those who choose to use the term biohacking clearly distinguish it from nefarious activities which they label exclusively separate as bioterrorism. The caricature of the rogue biohacker is demystified in a purposeful effort to define biohacking as constructive and not destructive and conducted or at least supervised by academically trained individuals that follow biosafety guidelines and expert advice on ethical and safety issues. Whether they do so remains unclear and would require an in-depth investigation into the practices of biohackers. The other tension in the word biohacker has to do with defining boundaries which can preclude and include different actors from different fields of interest. Taking into account that a hacker is an enthusiast or an expert that enjoys solving problems and the meaning of ‘hack’ can be characterized as “an appropriate application of ingenuity” anyone can be considered a hacker. Herein lies the process of construction of the collective identity as the movement defines for example whether what Craig Venter, iGEM'ers, grinders, and home beer brewers do is biohacking, DIYbio, or part of the movement. The collectivity of the DIYbio movement in itself can be clearly defined as biohackers can discern those who are part of the movement and those who are not based on a sense of solidarity of sharing the same values, beliefs, and critiques that incite collective action.


The motivations and values expressed by biohackers do reflect what has been previously described in the literature (Delfanti, 2013; Delgado, 2013; Kelty, 2010) which in turn derive from the hacker ethos. Biohackers claim their main drivers are based on learning and curiosity and the desire to solve problems and create social value. They appraise working with passion and creativity and are thus dedicated to innovation and self-expression. They also strongly object to imposed requirements and restrictions of any kind that may exclude people from access and participation or infringe on their freedom of inquiry. These values in a way could be understood as contributing to the Entertainment motivation in Linus's Law, the one that provides personal gratification and a sense of personal enrichment, while their values of openness, sharing, and collaboration reflect communal values and fulfill the social life part of Linus's Law.


The collective identity of the DIYbio movement does prove to be a kind of sub genre of the hacker ethic. The mobilization of the hacker ethic as I explained elsewhere resulted in the creation of new cultural models and forms of relationship in the shape of FLOSS and hackerspaces for the production of immaterial and material goods. Biohackers mobilize through similar models that can ultimately be described as CBPP which is a new form of organizing production, governance and ownership. Considering DIYbio as a social movement acknowledges their premise for social change. Change is perceived as necessary due to grievances with an ‘old’ and dominant model that conflicts with how they make sense of the world and therefore formulate goals towards new models that match with their worldviews. The conflictual factor of social movements with the dominant culture can be considered as the main driver that mobilizes collective action to enact social change. Since collective action is directed by the collective identity my next research question addresses:

(1) How do members perceive conflicts and enact goals in accordance with its collective identity?

In short, biohackers challenge the status quo of the organization of science, or in hacker terms: they challenge the ‘priesthood’ and the ‘cathedral’ of the life sciences and technologies. They oppose the social construction of science as an exclusive activity and therefore try to reduce the barriers to entry to allow and encourage individuals from different disciplines or without formal education to engage and contribute by providing the resources necessary for biological research. In this respect lies their goal to democratize biology—biology as knowledge, as science, and as a technology. Furthermore biohackers denounce the Authoritarian, Commissioned and Expert PLACE norms of post-academic science; the counter norms to Universalism and Disinterestedness of CUDOS. Biohackers claim scientists have lost the freedom in their profession and so they counteract with a deep commitment to freedom of inquiry so that scientists, designers, artists, or entrepreneurs can freely engage and pursue their own interests. Finally, biohackers denounce the reward system of scientists which fosters competitive behaviors towards priority (publications) and market potentials, which are furthered protected under IPR which they consider makes science and technology needlessly expensive. Biohackers in this sense advocate for the FLOSS model to revive the Communalism of CUDOS by preserving scientific knowledge and technical information in a commons. To understand the relationship and dynamics between how the DIYbio movement aligns collective action with their collective identity, in Table 5.1 I try to outline what could be considered three communal values that reflect the perceived conflicts as problems and the corresponding solutions as goals that align with their new values; which are given as openness, freedom, and collaboration.

TABLE

The effects from the proposed problem-solution framework may represent goals in themselves for some biohackers, for example some may state their goals in terms of education, social innovation, self-expression, or entrepreneurship. However these should be considered as effects because they are the outcome of the opportunities that the movement creates by democratizing biology.


The practices of DIYbio can be considered as a mode of ‘political action’ (Roosth, 2010) as they frame science as a right rather than a privilege, and they also question issues of ownership and distribution. Although the term ‘democratization’ is a politically charged subject, and in effect CBPP is about managing the means of production as a commons which challenges the capitalistic notion of property and waged labor, biohackers much like FLOSS are politically agnostic (G. Coleman, 2004) and frame the DIYbio movement as a cultural paradigm shift—to change the perception that biology can be hackable by anyone and that a CBPP model is a more efficient and productive model for the development and distribution of STI. This aligns with Alan Scott's argument that new social movements[^31] are first cultural and second, if at all, political (Scott, 1990). Developing a cultural ethos of “cooperative individualism” is considered by Bauwens (2005) as one of the key infrastructure to enable P2P projects.


In social movement theory, there is also a debate whether social movements are reactionary, proactive
or ambivalent towards the dominant culture (Buechler, 1995). As recognized by Delfanti (2013),
biohackers portray a general ambivalence towards capitalism, and it is this respect that biohackers
reflect the moral ambiguity of OSS in contrast to the moral imperative of FS against IMP. DIYbio is not
necessarily antagonistic towards Big Bio institutions, as it depends on their productive activities and
sometimes on their funding. The challenge to these institutions lies in their use of a scarcity-based
model that is in crisis that offers little to no competitive edge in the AI world of abundant information,
and distributed capital and cognitive resources[^32]. Big Bio institutions are thus in the midst of a transition themselves with initiatives such as open access and citizen science from academia, and open innovation and open-source business models from industries[^33]. This can explain how academia and industry have established relationships with DIYbio as they recognize its potential as low-cost learning and innovation centers. Given that these institutions are big and with well established reward mechanisms, transformation can be slow, therefore DIYbio still operates in symbiosis with big institutions but is able to practice new cultural models in alternative spaces. Which brings me to my last research question:

(2) How is the collective identity reproduced through its informal networks?

The informal networks, or otherwise known as free spaces, movement areas, cultural laboratories or spheres of cultural autonomy are different names for the same thing to denote “small-scale settings within a community or movement that are removed from the direct control of dominant groups, voluntarily participated in, and generate the cultural challenge that precedes or accompanies political mobilization” (Polleta, 1999, p. 1). Free spaces are essential for social movements as they constitute the places where solidarity, skills, and collective action are developed and identities, values and ideas are reproduced. From my experience in both online and offline networks these spaces effectively do that as dedicated work/play environments where members socialize and establish cooperative relationships; personal and professional, reinforcing the bond of the community. Moreover, these spaces strongly endorse open-source and biosafety practices which are part of the biohacker identity.


Many scholars argue that free spaces must be insulated from the dominant culture to avoid ideological intrusions and maintain a safe space where challenging ideas and tactics can be easily formulated (Friedman & McAdam, 1992; Morris & Mueller, 1992). As for many contemporary movements, Internet-based social networks provide the necessary spaces of autonomy for social movements to mobilize collective action (Castells, 2012), and the DIYbio movement thrives in cyberspace as online networks are independently managed and members are free to join and contribute. The solidarity in the DIYbio movement is extended through online social networks beyond a geographic location which enables them to mobilize action at a global scale; as they perceive the lack of access to biology as a structural problem of science as an exclusive and expensive activity and thus establishing biohackerspaces is the local solution to a much broader change. However, the autonomy of community labs in urban space—which are construed as open and alternative community-managed labs—can be compromised by being hosted and financed by formal institutions as some informants suggested their commitment to freedom of inquiry could be co-opted by sponsor interests. Francesca Polleta on the other hand argues that more than the physical separation from the dominant culture, mobilizing action relies on the cultural content, “what is crucial is the set of beliefs, values, and symbols institutionalized in a particular setting” (1999, p. 20). Moreover, to talk about a dominant culture fails to recognize that culture is not static, and that it is at the ‘cracks and fissures’ of this apparently hegemonic culture where social movements emerge from (Johnston & Klandermans, 1995). Mobilization in conjunction with traditional institutions, rather than co-optation, could signify the symbiosis between the biohacker and a new model of open science and open innovation—or what could be considered as the broader shift towards CBPP. A couple of informants disclosed the nature of their DIYbio labs as ‘hybrids’ because they are entirely hosted under universities but are combined with biohacking practices of developing open-source tools, sharing knowledge, and opening access to people beyond the ‘Officially Sanctioned Users’. For example, although the wetlab I attended is sponsored under a host institution it did not affect the ‘shoe-string’ budget characteristic of community labs which forces them to be thrifty and resourceful and the fact that I was able to attend educational workshops free of charge demonstrates a commitment to public outreach and engagement, and the lab safety course shows their approach to responsible biosafety.


These informal networks represent the conflictual spaces where their values of openness, freedom, and collaboration have to be defended against any intrusion of private interests to restrict participation, command projects, or seek profits through knowledge-hoarding (refer back to Table 5.1). The relationship and the subsequent power dynamics between biohackers and sponsoring institutions should be furthered studied as to ascertain whether there is a holistic integration of the hacker ethos, or the movement is at risk of exploitation as a cheap source of cognitive capital. Moreover the particular interests from these funding agencies can be called into question, as was the controversial case in the Maker movement of the Pentagon's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or DARPA, donating $10M to expand the hackerspace model to 1,000 high schools in the US by 2014. The program was criticized by many members of the maker community who stood against the program including prominent hacker and co-founder of Noisebridge Mitch Altman “Having these programs in schools is fantastic, but the military calling the shots in American education? (…) I don't see that as a positive move” (O'Leary, 2012). DARPA funded projects are not exclusive to military purposes and are not new to hackers, after all the agency initiated the ARPANET project in 1969; the progenitor of the Internet (Levy, 1984). Back then, Levy explains, hackers defended DARPA sponsorship by claiming the projects were not for the military, which Levy denounced as denying the obvious “who was to say that all that ‘interesting’ work in vision and robotics would not result in more efficient bombing raids?” (Levy, 1984, p. 125). So could DARPA funded biofuel research be considered as a non-peaceful purpose as its intention is to be used in military aviation[^34]? Or is it considered positive as it reduces their dependency to petroleum-derived fuels? How the biohacker movement will develop strategies and manage relationships with funding agencies and their interests while preserving their collective identity will be essential in the movement's success in maintaining solidarity and cohesiveness and ultimately achieve social change. The recent announcement of DARPA's new program, the Biological Robustness in Complex System (BRICS) for the development of synbio applications, might provide needed funding for biohackers[^35], but it might also put up to debate how the community can maintain alignment with their proposed worldview—which include peaceful purposes—and the encroachment of an agency whose purpose is to develop technology for armed forces that are sanctioned to use lethal-force.

### 5.1 Relevance of this Thesis
This thesis contributes to understanding a new sociological phenomena, the DIYbio movement, by generating insight into the mechanisms through which it mobilizes collective action towards social change. The proposed problem-solution framework identifies the key strategies that the movement mobilizes and differentiates these goals—openness, freedom, and collaboration—from more personal goals of biohackers such as learning, or entrepreneurship. Overall the DIYbio movement is part of a shift into P2P science (Bauwens, 2010) which is part of a broader phase transition; Jeremy Rifkin's (2014) Collaborative Commons, Benkler's (2006) CBPP, where the free culture of FLOSS equivalents are mutualizing knowledge, while the sharing economy of hackerspace equivalents are mutualizing the physical infrastructure (Bauwens, 2014). The DIYbio movement can be seen as the key agent to bring about social change in the life sciences and technologies by promoting the transformation into open science, open technology, and open innovation, that is towards CBPP. As academics, industrialists, and policy makers, unite to confront the global challenges of environmental degradation and climate change, the DIYbio movement can be seen as an inclusive and low-cost methodology to crowdsource cognitive and capital resources to face these issues together; the institutions with civil society, and the global north with the global south through the collaborative commons.

### 5.2 Reflections on this Thesis
The limitations and implications of this research are worth reflecting on critically; on the methodology and how it can be improved and on the nature of the data obtain. I also provide my personal and expert opinion as a life scientist on the DIYbio movement.


#### 5.2.1 Improving the Methodology
Combining several research methods such as participant observation and discourse analysis was helpful in immersing myself in the movement, but it came at a cost of fully analyzing each one of these parts. The participant observation was especially difficult to gather data. In the case of the online forum the information was vast and continuously dynamic and thus complex to code. Also access to the biohackerspace only included workshops in a controlled public outreach setting so I was unable to observe fully how it is that members reinforce their beliefs through their everyday activities in the lab. Therefore I suggest that quantitative discourse analysis of the online discussion forum could provide more substantial data into the topics and themes that are discussed and participation in more biohackerspaces could yield insights into how communities reinforce and reproduce their cultural materials and how they create solidarity between members and how they use it to recruit new actors.

From the interviews, the interview guide was helpful in drawing meanings and values of the informants, however, the questions could have been better designed as to elicit more coherent and concrete answers. The semi-structured format was appropriate for exploring meanings and it provided rich data but it proved to be complex and difficult to manage. The interviews at times would take unexpected turns as the interviewees would interpret questions in different ways, even when I tried to insist for a specific ‘answer’ they would try to iterate their initial response. I would not push the issue as to avoid taking complete control over the interview as I wanted them to express their own ideas and interpretations. Therefore I would suggest a more structured interview could give more amenable data for comparison. Another issue was the sample size of the interviews conducted (only seven) which can put into question whether different and commons perspectives were missed. Performing more interviews until reaching saturation would be a good method to ensure more representative data. The data obtained from the interviews provided rich data taking into account the global spread of the DIYbio movement with participants from three different regions of the world and six different nationalities. The median age was 24, they were all highly educated, and the majority were male; only one female interviewee. I therefore suggest that it is important to obtain a more heterogeneous mix of social conditions as the opportunities that the movement creates for each may be different and therefore the motivations, values, and grievances might change.


#### 5.2.2 Considerations for the results
The DIYbio movement portrayed in this thesis concerns itself with opening science which reflects the discontent with post-academic science. But the DIYbio movement is not just for scientists (as all intervieews were see Appendix E) as there are other identities that integrate into the movement, such as artists, activists, and entrepreneurs that may bring different critiques and visions that will influence the overall collective identity and dictate future collective action. Artists and activists may bring more provocative or subversive themes while entrepreneurs may bring leadership and independence which could affect the relationships between the challenging culture of DIYbio with that of the ‘dominant’ culture. I would suggest expanding data from these perspectives and analyze how they influence and are being influenced by the overall collective identity of the DIYbio movement. living organisms. Whether the concerns of these individuals are justified or not is beyond the scope of analysis of this thesis in understanding DIYbio as a social movement, however the debate and decision-making on regulations, oversight, and restrictions will most certainly influence the DIYbio movement in terms of creating new strategies of compliance, compromise, or workarounds that should keep in line with the collective identity.


#### 5.2.3 Perspective as a Life Scientist
With my former education as a food scientist and engineer I learned how we could use and adapt yeast and bacteria to produce beer and yogurt, and as a life scientist with a major in cell factory[^36], I now understand the potentials of using and adapting microorganisms to produce biopharmaceuticals, bioenergy, biomaterials or even for biomining and bioremediation. The difference is that food is mainstream while biotech is not, and this is what the DIYbio movement is trying to change. It is in this contrast where I can draw a meaningful comparison from my experience as a professional in both.


As a food scientist I take my knowledge into the kitchen as I understand and adjust conditions to achieve better fermentations or caramelizations. Most importantly I exercise basic food safety practices to avoid microbial growth, cross contaminations, and I rotate my sanitizers to avoid the proliferation of resistant bacteria. In this respect I can understand why DIYbio has a strong value towards biosafety, as if the production of food were an exclusive practice to food scientists like me, and we were starting the food hacklabs movement, we would implement and teach these basic principles. In its majority all DIYbio labs have highly qualified individuals and they are instilling basic safety practices into DIYbio labs from the get-go.


As a food enthusiast I continue to enjoy and appreciate food for its artisanship and its science. But as a life scientist the practice of biotech is still somewhat unreachable beyond a formal occupation as a student or as an employee in a university or a company. The DIYbio movement empowers scientists like me to explore biotechnology in a way that is meaningful for us. DIYbio may not produce the next synthetic cell anytime soon, but as I come from a developing country I see more value in developing low-cost technology that has great social and environmental impacts while the open-source philosophy ensures free knowledge and technology transfer.

The discourse that was captured was in its majority overwhelmingly techno-progressive and pro-DIYbio as I did not gather opposing or challenging views towards biohacking in my data collection. The insiders point of view was expected to be positive, but the outsiders perspective (articles) did not offer significant counterpoints towards the movement. Opposing views are important as they also shape the collective identity by offering different meanings. These negative perceptions could come from concerns over biosafety or biosecurity, or from bioconservatives that oppose modifying or enhancing


[^30]: Although the recent uprising of hacktivism with groups like Anonymous might be changing the societal perception of hackers as political cyber activists that hack for social change but this remains unclear.

[^31]: New Social Movements is a theory of social movements that maintains that social movements in post-industrial societies (since the mid-1960s) are different from previous proletariat mobilizations in that they are related to post-materialistic values. For a review see New Social Movement Theories (1995) by Steven M. Buechler.

[^32]: As for example projects like Wikipedia and Linux, or crowdfunding and peer-to-peer business models.

[^33]: Tesla Motors announced in June in a blog post they were releasing their patents “in the spirit of the open source movement, for the advancement of electric vehicle technology”.

[^34]: Which in all fairness can serve for humanitarian aid or for warfare.

[^35]: Whether the program will officially support biohacking is unclear but is suspected as a biohacker in an online forum claimed DARPA was scheduled for a visit to their community lab. Supporting biohackerspaces could be expected given their recent interest in financing the maker movement.

[^36]: Cell Factory is basically the idea of understanding microorganisms as a factory, where raw materials come in, they undergo an engineered production process, and out comes a finished product.
