---
chapter: Findings
parent: wearebiohackers
flow: 5
---

> “The composition of a common world would be the definition of politics.”
> ─ Bruno Latour

As I posited in theError: Reference source not found I am interested in gaining insight into the collective identity of the DIYbio movement. My findings were obtained, as I laid out in my Methods, by analyzing the practices and discourses of the DIYbio movement through participant observation in an online and offline DIYbio network (broad descriptions of my experience in them can be found in Appendix A), and discourse analysis from seven popular media articles and seven interviews with informants (info sheets available in Appendix B and Appendix E respectively). For analyzing the articles (Appendix C) I roughly categorized data that conveyed how the authors describe the DIYbio movement and its members, their motivations and values; on how they perceived goals and grievances of the movement; and on the descriptions of how the DIYbio movement operates, particularly how they portray community labs and operate in informal networks. The analysis of the interviews was more divergent as data was highly heterogeneous and not always comparable. I separated applicable quotes into certain themes (Appendix F) roughly following the same categorization as the articles—though the data was far more extensive. The informants were given color code names to keep their anonymity: • Blue, • Green, • Grey, • Black, • Brown, • Red, and • Orange. The findings are divided in relation to the three mechanisms of social movements. In §4.1 I address how the collective identity of the movement is described or defined—who is the “we” of the movement . In §4.2 I lay out the conflicts and their respective counter-solutions proposed by the DIYbio movement. Finally in §4.3 I briefly show how the informal networks are understood from the discourse analysis and what are the common elements observed from my participant observation.

### 4.1 Collective Identity
The first issue I encountered was on the (dis)agreement on how DIYbio and biohacking are defined. The articles (§C.2) reviewed use both terms synonymously and don't offer a special distinction when using the term biopunk[^27]. The informants on the other hand expressed some nuances on their meanings (§F.1, F.2). Mostly DIYbio was explained in terms of opening access to biology. DIY was portrayed as inexpensive inventions and workarounds and the term (bio)hacking held a general consensus (§F.2.1) to mean to understand how something works, many times by disassembling it, and then modifying it to change its original function. The activities of DIYbio were acknowledged by the informants as covering a wide range of interests. Grey said that the communality lies in an interest in science, technology, informatics and electronics that gives rise to the “DIYbio idea: a mix between DIY, hacking, biology and science”. Only Blue saw this diversity of communities of practice as conflicting in defining DIYbio as he recognized how grinders and QS can be considered to fall under DIYbio while he considers home beer brewers DIYbio “but at the same time those people do not feel associated with DIYbio at all”, he pointed out. The boundaries of who is a biohacker were a bit more strict (§F.2.2). Some noted how the term can scare people, Green said this is why he choses the term DIYbio. Red mentioned that he has heard the word used in a pejorative sense by groups that are against Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)[^28]. Only Brown and Red placed biohacking strictly in high-(bio)tech endeavors such as grinding (in the context of biopunk sci-fi) and synthetic biology and bioengineering. Disagreements were prompted when asked if synthetic biologist Craig Venter and iGEM'ers are biohackers. Some agreed they are as they fulfill the tinkering requirement of the biohacker, as Grey explained “because they look at nature with interest and disassemble pieces to understand how it works”. Some disagreed whether these actors can be considered biohackers in terms of whether they are considered part of mainstream science or not. Others expressed that biohackers have to share the knowledge and have to contribute to the ideals of the movement. Green pointed to this boundary from members and non-members of the movement from his iGEM experience:

> It is not that [the people from the iGEM group] are not doing anything to help the DIYbio movement, but they don't see what I see; this way in which we can change how innovation can be done, the way people can use the knowledge of biology.

Furthermore, I tried to explore what it is that interests them and others to join the DIYbio movement as to allude to the meanings they attribute to participating in the DIYbio movement (§F.3). Some mentioned learning as their main motivation, especially to learn and teach across disciplines. They recognized their interest in fulfilling personal curiosities and recognized that DIYbio gives them the freedom to pursue their own interests. The informants also expressed a pronounced sense of making a change; to contribute something of value to society. Blue mentioned the interest in social change as the main reason why people join DIYbio, he calls it:

> Social innovation through biotechnology, and it can be either science, business, philosophy, activism, it can be art, it all has certain impact on how people perceive the world and how they behave. But their attitude is the same.

When asked for the values of DIYbio many responded with the same themes (§F.4): opening access to biology for everyone by sharing and creating open-source tools, a commitment to the freedom to pursue their own interests, approaching things with creativity and curiosity and learning by tinkering. The articles expose similar values and interests (§C.2) and describe biohackers as passionate, playful, and entrepreneurial. The Scientist magazine said biohackers are “dedicated to education, innovation, problem solving using a new model in the human spirit of curiosity and exploration”. There was also another feature characteristic of biohackers that was highlighted, and that was their concern for biosafety (§C.3). Almost all articles pointed to the fear of biohackers having free access to technology that might produce the next global threat, deliberately or accidentally. However biohackers are described as educated scientists that have a proactive approach with a sense of responsibility towards mitigating risks. The Scientist stated “Much of this alarm is overblown, as critics overestimate the current abilities of the DIYbio movement and underestimate the ethics of the participants”[^29]. The informants acknowledged the societal concern over the widespread access to biotechnology (§F.5) but distanced themselves from nefarious activities as Black said “We all want to do something good, constructive, we don't want to create bioweapons (…) I think that is something very clear in the movement”. Non of them expressed any distaste over safety and ethical oversight regulations, on the contrary they highlighted it as necessary. They noted the importance of responsibility in DIYbio as Orange said “Handling living creatures is entering a very different techno-sphere”.


Black highlighted how these fears parallel with the concerns that arose when the computer industry was starting saying back then “people thought they were going to build a terminator that would end humankind”, not only did that not happened, he said, but 30 years later we all have smartphones instead. The comparison made with the computer industry is something that was highlighted often (§F.6), even Forbes magazine made the comparison “Biohackers are to biotechnology what Steve Jobs was to the IBM S/360 mainframe”. The comparison is often made of the DIYbio movement bringing
biotech to the masses to the transformation of the computing industry—from mainframes in university labs to personal pocket-size Internet-ready microelectronics.


### 4.2 Conflictual Collective Action
The conflicts can be understood as a dichotomy between the movement's grievances and goals. The articles (§C.4) portray the goal of DIYbio as lowering the barrier to entry to biology for citizen scientists, amateurs, and entrepreneurs. The informants (§F.7) expressed in a clear way the goal of the movement as opening access to science and technology to the public; bring science to the people; democratize technology, and so on. When asked whether they considered the DIYbio movement as a political, economic, technological, or cultural movement the response was overwhelmingly cultural or what some called ideological. The goal of opening access is contrasted to the perception of biology as closed, unaccessible outside traditional institutional settings (§C.5,F.8). Some informants noted that for now only individuals with specialized degrees can work/play with biology which restricts participation from people of different fields of study or without the privilege to formal education. They denounced that even those that do have access (like themselves) don't have the freedom to pursue their own interests since as a researcher one must climb the academic ladder and play into the competitive game of publishing in order to receive grants and have the possibility to manage their own labs or projects (§F.10, F.11). Black succinctly summarized it as “I think scientists have lost a lot of freedom in academia to practice their profession”. Green contrasts this by saying that in DIYbio no one has to justify things in terms of profits or generating new knowledge, “you can explore things just for fun”. In this sense they described DIYbio as a new model of doing science, that is more open and collaborative. They generally note that normal science is to big and slow to change. Many of the informants expressed that access to education and technology is essential in the GMO debate as they considered that people hold an unfounded fear as they don't understand the science. As Black said:

> [With knowledge people] can understand what is DNA, they can understand that their cells have DNA, understand how a scientist can produce a GMO to produce bioplastics and understand what risks does that involve; what are the ethical and biosafety implications that it entails.

Blue agreed that democratizing science is important as it allows people to “make good decisions about [biotechnology]” and so that people can “express themselves with biotechnology and can then find new applications for it. The things to be able to achieve that; cheap tools, sharing designs, those are all side effects of that”. Expensive lab equipment is stated in the articles as one of the main obstacles biohackers try to overcome and the informants (§F.9) expressed an overall discontent over needlessly expensive equipment as Gray said upset:

> Why does a PCR machine cost €20,000? it is just an easy device. It is more complex to make a microwave and you can buy them at €20 in the supermarket. Why can't I buy a PCR in the supermarket for €20?

All informants agreed that DIYbio and open-source foster low-cost science and technology, and although they noted the DIYbio movement does not hold any formal norms that forbid knowledge produced in biohackerspaces from being patented, ultimately the goal of the DIYbio movement will always try to be open-source as it remains the ultimate truism in opening access. Orange strongly defended that everything should be open-source because it provides access to marginalized communities and because it is more adaptable to people's needs:

> What open-source also allows is that with the knowledge you can actually localize it to your own needs which makes it more inclusive. People can adapt it and hack it to things that are relevant to their communities and their culture.

When it comes to DIYbio and its relationship with academia and industry (§F.12), biohackers acknowledge DIYbio as complementary to academia and industry not as antagonistic. They consider DIYbio as a new way to learn and develop STI, where biohackers are intrinsically motivated by their own ideas and curiosities. They also recognized—an albeit weak—relationship with academia an industry as these institutions value DIYbio as a learning and innovation center. For Black, advancements have been made,up to a point [sic],by universities and industries but says DIYbio wants to be part of the solution and see if they can advance better and faster.


### 4.3 Informal Networks
From the discourse analysis, only descriptions or mentions to the spaces were obtained. The articles (§C.6) generally portrayed community labs as alternative, eclectic, and frugal spaces with ‘makeshift’ lab equipment that are open to anyone regardless of scientific background and are unaffiliated with traditional institutions. The informants (§F.13), highlighted the openness of DIYbio labs and online networks; there are no qualifications required to join and everyone is free to choose how to engage, on what and why. Preserving the freedom was highlighted as essential, and the origins of funding was problematized by Green “If money comes in, it doesn't have to restrict my freedom in any sense.” Orange maintained that this is why hackerspaces try to remove themselves from the system but maintains that at the same time they are being co-opted with private funding.


From the participant observation the practices and discourse of the free spaces was more evident. First, it was very easy to join in; no requirements and no fees. The biohackerspace (see §A.1) I attended to is sponsored by a variety of government funds that support art, science and technology. The first workshop felt informal, and attendees were from different backgrounds and disciplines, most of them artists and designers. The workshop was intended for discussing projects involving genetic modification, their potentials and risks. The meeting had included free dinner and drinks and after the session was concluded many stayed behind, finished the drinks and got to know more about each other. All the attendees started networking, everyone spoke enthusiastically about their interests in DIYbio, their current and future projects and exchanged contact information for potential collaborations. The second workshop was a safety training for using the wetlab. We reviewed laboratory safety techniques that included YouTube educational videos which were informative as well as humorous. We were given a written exam to test our new safety knowledge and at the end we all went through the test and discussed the right answers together. The organizers pointed out that these safety rules would become clearer as one starts working in the lab and assured that you can always ask someone for help. We also received a tour of the hackerspace, saw where the equipment was located and how to use them, as the manager of the lab said “we want you to feel at home”.


The online DIYbio mailing list (§A.2) involves actors from many countries and it is encouraged to have all discussions in English. The language used is a mix between informal talk, Internet slang, and biotech jargon. The topics include people updating on their current projects and sharing current events, but most of them have to do with exchanging scientific and technical knowledge—people ask for help, advice, or for expertise. When projects are shared, people inquire about specs and encourage each other to share all the information as to foster collaboration. Topics can then quickly gravitate towards issues of IPR and they discuss strategies and mechanisms to make their projects free/libre. There are moderators to the list but they only ‘weed out’ spam and have taken a stance against deleting posts upon requests in an attempt to avoid censorship. The moderators are the original creators of the discussion site and so far their role has not been questioned or challenged on the contrary it has been praised.


Overall both the biohackerspace and the DIYbio mailing list primarily serve as networking places where members apart from serious engagement in the science, they socialize and establish relationships for future and ongoing collaborations.

[^27]: The term biopunk is situated in the context of Wohlsen's book (2011) Biopunk which as previously mentioned does not stress the biopunk ideology of subversion, rather the biopunk ideology of Meredith Patterson and her biopunk Manifesto of opening access to biology.

[^28]: In my research of biohackers, this is the first instance that encountered where the term of biohacker is used with this connotation.

[^29]: This phrase by the author, although not stated must have been inspired by Ellen Jorgensen's TED Talk  Biohacking — you can do it, too.
