---
chapter: Introduction
parent: wearebiohackers
flow: 2
---

> “Revolution doesn’t happen when society adopts new technologies— it happens when society adopts new behaviors”
> ─ Clay Shirky

This thesis investigates into the emerging Do-it-Yourself biology (DIYbio) movement which is formed by a growing international community of professionals, amateurs, and enthusiasts with a shared interest in studying, designing, and engineering biological systems under different settings from traditional scientific institutions. The life sciences and technologies will play a major role in developing solutions in the fields of health care, agriculture, industrial processes, and environmental managing, and the premise of the DIYbio movement is that opening access and participation in biotechnology can have the potential to “spur global innovation and promote scientific literacy” (Frushkin, Kuiken, & Millet, 2013). Although DIYbio is very often defined as a movement[^1], so far it seems this concept has not been properly analyzed from social movement theory. Social movements are important sociological
phenomena “because they are key agents for bringing about change within societies” (Crossley, 2002). Movements are a ‘source of creativity’ for societies that provide new ideas, identities, and even ideals to try to change individual and group behaviors, policies or the cultural understanding of a society (ibid). Paradoxically, social movements are in themselves manifestations of social change and the DIYbio movement can be seen as contemporary to similar counter-movements that are already transforming society towards participatory and collaborative practices like the open science and citizen science movements (Bauwens, 2010). Studying DIYbio as a social movement can generate insight into the dynamics of the movement in terms of how it brings about social change.


The first thing to consider in analyzing DIYbio as a social movement is to understand what is classified as a social movement. Scholar definitions on what counts as a social movement vary. Mario Diani (1992) proposed a definition based on a comparative discussion of definitions and defined that social movements are a distinct social process consisting of mechanisms through which actors engage in collective action. He identifies three mechanisms: (i) informal networks where resources are exchanged in pursuit of common goals; (ii) political or cultural conflicts in which actors engage to initiate or halt social change; and (iii) a shared collective identity upon which collective action is coordinated. The first point sustains that collective action is carried out in informal networks that represent movement areas that act as cultural laboratories where individuals are free to invest in “the experimentation and practice of new cultural models, forms of relationships and alternative perceptions and meanings of the world” (Melucci, 1989, p. 60). The second point asserts a conflictual factor in social movements. The conflict arises from a tangible discontent of ‘old’ models—political, cultural, economic—to what actors consider a public issue and therefore aim to articulate new models through collective action to enact social change (Touraine, 1985). The third point maintains that individuals recognize themselves and others as a collectivity and construct a collective identity—the formulation of a “we”—that encompass the shared belief structures that is used to dictate collective action (Melucci, 1993). The purpose of this research is to provide the foundation to understanding DIYbio as a social movement by generating insight into these mechanisms; through which the movement mobilizes collective action to achieve social change.


To investigate these mechanisms I decided to take the concept of collective identity as my main analytical tool because it provides the framework for my methodology and my background. The first reason to focus on the collective identity is because it influences and many times defines the other mechanisms characteristic of social movements. The construction of the collective identity can arise from individuals that orient themselves and identify others as part of the movement because they share similar grievances and agree on the course of action (goals) to create social change. The collective identity is also often reproduced and reinforced in movement areas—the informal networks—that create solidarity among members. Therefore my research questions are:


(0) How is the collective identity of the DIYbio movement defined?
(1) How do members perceive conflicts and enact goals in accordance with its collective identity?
(2) How is the collective identity reproduced through its informal networks?


My next reason to focus on the collective identity of the DIYbio movement has to do with the book Biohackers (2013) by Alessandro Delfanti—one of the few scholars who has addressed the DIYbio movement. In his book he presents the politics of open science as a remix between traditional academic norms and the hacker[^2]: ethic and he presents DIYbio as one of its manifestations. For Delfanti, “DIYbio [is] a very interesting example of a direct translation of free software and hacking practices into the realm of cells, genes, and labs” (2013, p. 112) in the context of a deeper transformation of the way
science is done based on more open and collaborative web-based tools that enable a ‘proactive’approach to the production of information. Therefore my starting point is to conceptualize the biohacker as the collective identity for the DIYbio movement.


To gain insight into the translation that Delfanti refers to I focused on understanding the three connections he mentions give rise to the DIYbio movement: the hacker, the Internet, and open science. To understand the degree to which biohacking is an extension of the hacker ethos it is imperative to unfold the hacker identity as to ascertain the meanings that the biohackers copy from it. Therefore in section 2.1 I review the history and the most popular narratives that form part of the hacker culture, which includes the development of the personal computer and free and open-source software. I then examine the hacker ethic that was instilled in the development of both and how it has moved from cyberspace into urban space in the form of hackerspaces. Free software laid the foundations into a new mode of production, governance, and distribution that has extended beyond software into other realms of social production. In section 2.2 I analyze these economic and cultural transformations in the context of the Internet and its participatory architecture as to give insight into the emergence of a more open and collaborative culture and production model described as Commons-Based Peer-Production. Next in section 2.3, I explain the changing landscape in science from a closed and hierarchical model towards an open and distributed model. Finally in section 2.4 I present the roots and catalysts of the DIYbio movement and I present the biohacker community, who they are, what they do, and what they believe in to begin to understand the biohacker collective identity.


For my methodology, researching the collective identity of the DIYbio movement enables to study the formulation of the “we” through the shared cultural materials of the movement which are empirically less challenging to explore than other forms of culture. Public symbols carry a set of meanings that can be clearly identified as people use them and are defined around them. The concept of collective identity therefore can be used to direct attention to the observable practices and the discourses through which members of the movement give meanings to their actions. That is, the “we” is used as a symbol through which members give meaning to the movement and their participation in it. To explore how the movement is defined I used a combination of qualitative methods such as participant observation (online and offline) in movement areas which included a mailing list that works as a discussion forum and a biohackerspace where they work on their DIYbio projects, documentary analysis of popular media articles to obtain ‘outsider’ discourse, and in-depth interviews with members of the DIYbio movement to obtain an ‘insiders’ perspective. Since language is the medium for the social construction of reality, analyzing discourse can provide meaningful insight into how biohackers—as the collective identity of the DIYbio movement—make sense of the world and how the movement fits into it, this can provide rich data into why (grievances) and how (goals) they mobilize collective action towards social change (purpose).


[^1]: A Google Search on “DIYbio” and “movement” results in a variety of sources that define DIYbio as such. Some examples include articles from: Wikipedia (for starters), Nature, The Scientist, h+ Magazine, The New York Times, Popular Science, Discover Magazine, Slate Magazine, The Guardian, Vice, the BBC, Singularity Hub, Forbes, WIRED, P2P foundation, and so forth.
[^2]: It is important to note that the word hacker carries the popular stigma of cybercriminals and ‘security breakers’ but these are known as crackers by the hacker subculture “hackers build things, crackers break them” (Raymond, 2001). Hackers value freedom and mutual help.
